---
layout: post 
date: 2016-01-24
title: (The Self is a Shield)
author: Sean Beld
category: poetry
issue: edge
---
The self is a shield. It cannot surround, but only defends one side. One direction. A shadow. The shield is a self. It cannot surround, but defends on all sides. It is a direction. The shield is a self. It cannot surround the shadow. The shadow is a self. It cannot surround, but defends from my side. It has one direction. The self is a shadow. It shields on all sides. It takes one side at a time. The self is a shield that suffers from one side. One side suffers from all sides. All sides suffer from the self. The shield that self defends sees one side and then the next. The self the shield defends suffers all sides all at once. The direction is my direction. The shield suffers, calls the self-defense one-sided. One side is all sides. One direction is not a direction. One side is a shield that suffers. One direction is a self that defends. One side, then the other. One direction, then the next. It cannot sound. It sees both sides. The self it cannot see all sides, but defends both. The self sounds like a shield. The shield sounds like sword sounds like suffer. (I regret telling you this). The shield is a self. It can surround, but defends all sides one time. All directions. It can sound. The self is a shield. It surrounds, but defends one side. It isn’t one direction. The shield isn’t a self. It can surround the shadow. The shadow is not a self. It can surround, but defends from your side. It has all directions. The shadow is a self. It shields all sides. The shield is a self that suffers from one direction. The shield that surrounds the self suffers from all sides. All sides suffer from one side. The self suffers from one side. The self that shields sees all sides and then the next. The shield the self defends suffers one side at a time. The direction is your direction. The self suffers, calls the shield defense from all sides. All sides are one side. All directions are direction. One shield is a side that suffers. One self is a direction that defends. All sides, then another. All directions, then the next. It sounds. It sees one side. The self sees all sides, but defends none.