---
layout: post 
date: 2016-01-24
title: "#11"
author: Erin Kautza
category: essays
issue: edge
---
**Informational Video #11: Transcript (For Applicants*):**

*At all costs: don’t. Best left to experts, long and thin of heart.

Does the following resonate? A pinch deserves a pinch, true, a twist a deadly twist; black for black,  
blue for blue. In short, are you on board with swift, irrevocable retribution?

Dear Applicant, the real job begs 1\. More than raw constellations imposed upon other manic  
bodies. 2\. An uncrackable veneer.

Believe: This is not a position well-filled by those lazily thumbing back pages, comparing dining  
room lengths, ecrus, or considering qualities of sandstone over demitassed coffees. Instead, a strict  
practice of sending the cruelest gossip down the crookedest path will surely scare up the right skin.

To wit: Welt. Welt. Welt and a soft-boiled egg. Contusion and sustenance coupled. More plainly,  
can you batter with soul? Are you intimate, Applicant, with classical cycles/styles of abuse?

Sit back. Do not relax. Stridently erect is the only proper position for future purveyors of menace.  
When a line forms, and it will, choose the deadest eye. When skirts are hiked, go for the highest; the largest ratio of tremble to exposure. Always strive to be the one one never expects. Here, expect the unexpected. Then crush. To utter pulp.

That said, having heard (with the rest): you will know it when you see it, apply as if a salve. The  
perfect marriage of barrier and rejuvenator! And, frankly, the only shield left to brandish: at this  
juncture, the rest will have been stripped away.

Be warned, however: succumbing to these brutally pervasive adolescent properties is an  
unbecoming blemish. Ground for termination in its most humiliating forms.

Lastly, are you comfortable with regression, Applicant? Violation? Transgression? Here, all  
underbrush, all black earth, all backpedalling, is secret forward motion. Each fresh low should be  
assessed as a brand new high. Force is still force. To be used indiscriminately and with relish.

Here, we give as we get.

We look forward to tandem ravishment.