---
layout: post 
date: 2016-01-24
title: It Is Time
author: Peycho Kanev
category: poetry
issue: hunger
---
I made a promise! I stop hating myself. Yes!  
Anyways, that’s God’s job and of his forsaken  
children. Why I got this thumb? For holding  
the knife or lifting the club and beat my brother  
down? For counting money or spreading the butter  
on yesterday’s slices of bread? I made  
a promise and I will stick to it. Do you hear me,  
Onan and you too, Sisyphus? I will stop punishing  
myself with alcohol and bad books, from now  
on I am starting pleasing myself with words. Oh,  
yes! This is my first poem. My reward is waiting for me  
at the corner of the hungry typewriter and the stack  
of empty leaves and I am here to claim it! It is time!  
For poetry and for some astonishing beauty. Hey,  
Time! My fearsome collar-scholar, it is time for you  
to fall on your knees in front of these words. If you  
don’t do it I will make you. Right, Horace? Yes, I know.  
The darkness of blackness will miss me, but I have  
to do it. There is no other way and there will never be. Now  
and then. My path is clear. The crows of my lines are  
circling the magnitude of my boiling words. But the battle  
has just begun. The scarecrows of my bookish fields are  
strangely still, the wind comes and goes. I prefer to listen  
to the whisper of the clouds instead of some stupid  
and banal babble of the bottle! Can you see the light over  
there? Shining on the edge of the horizon? Well, I do!  
Hence, the time has come! I am pouring myself the cup of  
Dante and starting all over again. With nothing to lose!