---
layout: post 
date: 2016-01-24
title: Idle
author: Philippa Snow
category: columns
issue: idol
---
(_Being a compendium of unused pitches, rejections, dumb ideas, and miserable failures which have lain dormant—either on my desktop or in my outbox—between the summer of 2013 and sometime last Thursday morning:_)

1\. An article about the on-air suicide of the newsreader Christine Chubbuck, in which I rhapsodised about the politician R. Budd Dwyer being a proto-reality celebrity, referring to him as “the Paris Hilton of the firearm exit; a gorehound’s God.” Related: the germ of an article making a similar proposition about the Canadian Psycho, Luka Magnotta, languishing on my Tumblr. I cited his previous experience as a reality game show contestant and maker of semi-amateur twink-style porn.

(I have fixations.)

2\. On which topic: a cut-up, neo-beat novella with the title “Junkyard Cumholes,” whose appellation was taken from a gay porn VHS that I found beneath an ex-tenant’s bed. I thought, at the time, that this sounded a little like something William Burroughs might use—a name spat out by a talking asshole under a queasy spotlight. I did not decide what “Junkyard Cumholes” would say about the human condition, exactly, but the porno’s synopsis mentions “a crippling thirst for gism.”

3\. An email which I sent to myself at 4 a.m., which reads simply: “I am skeptical about Cindy’s lesbianism,” and which I assume to be a coded idea of some kind or other about a thing I intended to write. I assume this purely because I have never met anybody called Cindy.

4\. A piece of satiric fiction that centers around the possible existence of a violent sex tape starring the actress Lindsay Lohan.

Sample text: “Frustrated, her co-star would reach his entire fist into Lindsay Lohan’s mouth, like a jaded veterinarian inspecting the teeth of an animal, and then, with a single downward motion, he’d grab the actress’ meth-honed jaw, and yank it south, until it popped free from its temporomandibular hold. A sound unlike any I’d ever heard would exit the actress Lindsay Lohan’s throat—a gargled sort of noise, with a death-rattle’s bubbling, husky thrum—and the submaxilla would hang there, like a carcass in an abattoir, and Lindsay Lohan, now starkly sober, would let out a childish cry of distress.”

This began as something which I believed would translate as a biting commentary on the treatment of women, habitual drug-users, washed-up celebrities in the modern age and the tabloid media. It ended as something which could be described, at best, as “wholly unprintable.”

5\. An inaugural fashion column commissioned (perhaps unwisely on their part) by a drearily edgy lifestyle website, in which I posited the use of supermodels to harvest teratomas as genetic fashion accessories, for reasons about which I was characteristically vague. Specific models were suggested as likely candidates for the fictional procedure, with special attention going to the then-20-year-old Lindsey Wixson, whom I described as having “two big Bardot incisors bursting violently out of her beach-ball mouth.” I was not taken on as a permanent columnist.

6\. A thoughtful and footnote-heavy comparison of Shakespeare’s “Romeo and Juliet” alongside its Troma counterpart, in which—during, I would estimate, the first three minutes—a woman is shot in the vagina. The Troma version is narrated by Lemmy from Motörhead.

7\. A text-message draft reading: “corpse-coloured rubber.” I don’t believe this is even mine; on further reflection, I think that it might be from _Brave New World_ by Aldous Huxley. Frankly, I am afraid to check.

8\. A review of a retrospective by the artist Sturtevant, whose body of work consists, in the main, of copies of works by other major European and American artists, including Andy Warhol, Joseph Beuys and Paul McCartney. It is a copy-paste of the Telegraph’s review, in its entirety.

9\. A notebook scribble from Art Basel Miami, which says simply: “Endless Viagra-fuelled fucks in burnished convertibles, and topless, quasi-lesbian fingerbangs in turquoise-tiled South Beach jacuzzis, where everything slithers, wetly, all over everything else in the muskish heat, and neither ‘Crystal’ nor ‘Jaimie,’ it’s suspected, is really gay at all, even a little—barely a Kinsey two—but money talks, and it whispers, sweetly, _fuck each other_.”

10\. An essay I currently am two weeks past my deadline with, entitled: “The Diseases of the Era: Angelina Jolie’s Double Mammoplasty,” which bears more than a minor debt to Ballard, albeit openly.

(Am including this here as a means of absolving myself, and to demonstrate that I’ve learned nothing.)