---
layout: post 
date: 2016-01-24
title: Golden
author: Jim Davis
category: poetry
issue: chthonic
---
All morning staring at the falcon perched on a leather glove.  
Deliberate repositioning. Talons like muted shotgun triggers  
in crisp Chicago winter. The Golden Nugget challenges  
the Golden Apple to a battle of tight-eyed breakfast spots.  
The Nugget—across from Nikos’ Gyros Stand, where Niko  
employed Armando to slice the beef and lamb, Debbie to  
sweep the floor, though she would be gone in summer, when  
classes let out—offers 2 buttermilk pancakes, 2 extra-large eggs,  
2 links of dry sausage and hash browns for $4.99 & a bottle  
of wine, out the door. The Golden Apple, on the other hand,  
is rumored to warm funnymen after they improvise second-  
city assemblies—some big names, we’re told. Across the street,  
St. Alphonsus’ Church, where he received communion,  
admitted only forgivable sins, (he heard being mean to you sister  
was worth the repetition of seven _Hail Marys_ and one _Our Father_).  
The Russian bell tower cathedrals have gone gray with time.  
He scoffs at neglect, selfish dismissal of tennis shoes to the lamp line.  
Repentance. The falcon drops for field mice & smaller birds. Coats  
bled dry in bolls of what might be cotton. Repetition (sounds about  
right) & repentance share the confines of oak chambers, polished  
delivery. The bell tower’s narrow corridors, tiles from the revolution-  
ary mosaics in red and white, fall. Repetition, repetition, we were  
to meet at the Golden Apple or Nugget, repentance ringing  
from garden apartments. We were to meet at the fractal edge  
of summer and nonexistence. We are distracted by nighthawks  
slicing though whatever it is we’ve said. After all the acoustic  
guitars have been cracked and bled of string, the hawks settle in  
the golden bliss of satiation, that bliss of what we’ve emptied and held.