---
layout: post 
date: 2016-01-24
title: "USA #1"
author: Russell Jaffe
category: poetry
issue: ameria
---
_“Whoa, son. Now just where do you think you’re going, boy?” —Cop  
“Caalliffoorrnniaa” —Jimmy—The Wizard, 1989_

Go ahead and write my will and last requests on this paper that protects  
the chips from touching the basket in the Mexican food restaurant.  

Because this America is an all-night Mexican food restaurant.  
Leave lip lipstick and housesitting bags, your film canisters and unexploded bombs,  

in the desert.  
Please take me there. I need new kinds of sprawl.  

Print away my soul on a contract in neon calligraphy lines.  
Sign it in guacamole.  

I am smitten with you down to my blood.  
And I was. So here’s what I did:  

I put the TV on loud and bright, blockaded the stars from crashing  
my American vodka night on earth.  

I rolled all the blunt stubs in the ash tray into one burrito and ate of it.  
I strapped the last of the roof of my house to the car. Buried my shoes in the lawn.  

I wrote about sounds trees and rocks under cover of pillow fort.  
I burned CDs and then burned everything else,  

left behind an ashram of ashes and TVs and analog cables. Wore an “I (HEART) WIRES” shirt.  
Ordered tons of takeout and left the delivery drivers to battle it out.  

I hitched in every possible way  
every input to every other input.  

This grand analog and I, we’re going to be just fine.  
And we are wild this way.  

I am wild  
on my way.  
I am so wild about you.  
I am so wild.  
I am  
so.  