---
layout: post 
date: 2016-01-24
title: Keen
author: Lauren Gordon
category: poetry
issue: homme
---
**Chapter 1**  
_Nancy meets her robot._  

The first thing you should do is put the robot back in the closet,  
lock it, and for safety hide the key.  
Ned will say he doesn’t see a thing. Ned will hide the key under a statuette, carefully palming her ceramic tit. Ned will insert the tape.  
He wants to know, do you think  
the sound of your voice can activate the robot?  

**Chapter 2**  
_Nancy loves her father._  

I guess you recognize the black widow spider, spun-  
suppose we look in the cupboards? Egg. Corn.  

And your mother, dead.  

Nancy thinks hard, wants answers hard, hewn  
like the oak of a trapdoor; you can’t pull that trick again  

unless, she thinks fearfully,  
unless she thinks fearfully,  
you fall into such a deep hole, or onto some craggy rocks –  

Query the shaft of light falling on your hardwood floors;  
your father whispering legalese into the folds of your  
mother’s nightgown, a stale cigarette  
your own heart an ashtray, always careful to avoid the trap-door area, reset:  
wait for the whirring sound that smokes above your bed  
your head pressing like concrete.  

**Chapter 3**  
_Nancy and the Innuendo._  

Ned beamed his flashlight, threw light  
into a nest of darkness; we’re here! Let us out!  
Call loudly, yank the knob with all your might  
then feel the relief; a hidden button is a gasp,  

the couple’s prison a turret  
unbreakable glass. Investigate the foot  
in your bed, the one attached to your ankle  
then have it removed.  